WIP Workload partitioning API enhancement (#802)
openshift/enhancements: enhancements/management-workload-partitioning-api.md

## Motivation

This section is for explicitly listing the motivation, goals and non-goals of
this proposal. Describe why the change is important and the benefits to users.

### Goals

This feature is about designing a read-only API that will describe the enabled workload partitions (types, classes, etc.). This information is needed for kubelet to start exposing the right resources as well for the admission webhook to know when the pod manipulation is needed.

It is expected this API will be created at the installation process. Either manually or using the Performance addon operator render mode.

The short term goal is to get enough functionality to create the `management` partition where all OpenShift infrastructure could be placed. This partition is cluster wide and only affects pods with certain pre-agreed-upon labels and placed in specific pre-annotated namespaces.

### Non-Goals

- Long term goal of allowing cluster admins to create their own partitions is not part of this proposal for now
- Day 2 creation of partitions is not part of the proposal

> - Namespace or MCP specific partitions are not part of the proposal

Reviewer: I'm not sure how widely we've discussed the different types of scope we might want to have, so phrasing this a little differently may make it clearer.

```suggestion
- Partitions with scope less than the entire cluster (such as being limited to Namespaces or MCPs) are not part of the proposal
```

## Proposal

> The proposal is to define a new cluster-wide Custom Resource Definition that would describe the allowed partition names in the status section. That way it hints at being a read only object where no user/admin input or modifications are expected.

Reviewer 2: It is not clear from the proposal who should own this CRD?

Reviewer: That's explained a little better in #753 but we should probably summarize it here. The CRD will be defined in `openshift/api`.

```yaml

> apiVersion: workloadpartitioning.openshift.io/v1

Reviewer: In the original enhancement we use `workload.openshift.io` in some annotations. Should we do that here, too, and make this something like `partitioning.workload.openshift.io` What is standard/preferred for OpenShift APIs?

Alternatively, do we anticipate other API inputs related to workloads that might live on this CR later, so we should not include "partition" in the name?

kind: WorkloadPartitions
metadata:
  # arbitrary name, all objects of this Kind should be processed and merged
  name: management-partition
status:

>   # list of strings, defines partition names to be exposed by kubelet

Author: Oh yeah, you are right.

>   globalPartitionNames:

Reviewer: Bike shed: We should be consistent and either call it "global" or "cluster" but not use those two terms interchangeably.

    - management
```

> To allow for future extensibility and possible multiple sources of workload partition names (coming from customers, the installer, or other operators, etc.), we propose that there might be multiple `WorkloadPartitions` objects injected into the cluster. The expected behavior is that all components would just merge all the defined names together.

Reviewer: In other places where we have cluster-scoped configuration resources like this we look for 1 well-defined name, often `cluster`. I'm not sure how we decide between 1 and many, though. Maybe in this case many makes sense if we assume there may be multiple creators but that the CRD only has status fields. Do we really anticipate multiple creators?

Author: If we allow custom partitions in the future then I would say yes, there might be multiple owners in such case (customer creates one and PAO renders another one). I just did not want to close the door prematurely.

Only the cluster administrator will have the ability to create or manipulate the WorkloadPartitions objects. Anyone will be allowed to read them.

> 

Reviewer: We should probably say explicitly that we don't have a controller to reconcile the resource because it is not expected to change.

### User Stories

Please check the user stories in the parent [Workload partitioning management](management-workload-partitioning.md) feature.

The gist of this piece is that it is expected to define the workload partitions before the installation of a cluster starts. A cluster with no `WorkloadPartitions` objects present at the installation time will not have workload partitioning enabled.

### Implementation Details/Notes/Constraints [optional]

What are the caveats to the implementation? What are some important details that
didn't come across above. Go in to as much detail as necessary here. This might
be a good place to talk about core concepts and how they relate.

### Risks and Mitigations

1) An admin creates a WorkloadPartitions object manually after the cluster has been running for some time on a cluster that already has partitioning enabled
1) An admin creates the WorkloadPartitions object manually after the cluster has been running for some time on a cluster with no workload partitioning enabled
1) An admin deletes the WorkloadPartitions object that was created during the install process

> 1) A random user manages to create a WorkloadPartitions object due to a bug in the defined RBAC rules

Reviewer: This list is a good start. We should add some detail about what ill effects might result from each of these cases.

[maturity-levels]: https://git.k8s.io/community/contributors/devel/sig-architecture/api_changes.md#alpha-beta-and-stable-versions
[deprecation-policy]: https://kubernetes.io/docs/reference/using-api/deprecation-policy/

**Examples**: These are generalized examples to consider, in addition
to the aforementioned [maturity levels][maturity-levels].

#### Dev Preview -> Tech Preview

- Ability to utilize the enhancement end to end
- End user documentation, relative API stability
- Sufficient test coverage
- Gather feedback from users rather than just developers
- Enumerate service level indicators (SLIs), expose SLIs as metrics
- Write symptoms-based alerts for the component(s)

#### Tech Preview -> GA

- More testing (upgrade, downgrade, scale)
- Sufficient time for feedback
- Available by default
- Backhaul SLI telemetry
- Document SLOs for the component
- Conduct load testing

**For non-optional features moving to GA, the graduation criteria must include
end to end tests.**

#### Removing a deprecated feature

- Announce deprecation and support policy of the existing feature
- Deprecate the feature

### Upgrade / Downgrade Strategy

> There is currently no active component managing the WorkloadPartitions custom resource. Since we do not want to allow enabling workload partitioning for existing clusters there does not have to be any upgrade logic.

Author: Isn't this the same I have in risks? New CR created in a cluster with no workload partitioning enabled.

> There is currently no active component managing the WorkloadPartitions custom resource. Since we do not want to allow enabling workload partitioning for existing clusters there does not have to be any upgrade logic.

Reviewer: True, yes, that's the same scenario. Maybe referencing the risk here is enough, so we can avoid duplication.

In the future, we will have to handle upgrade from older to newer versions of the WorkloadPartitions CRD if we change it in a backwards incompatible way.

### Version Skew Strategy

This CRD is closely tied to features in Kubelet and the new workload partitioning admission webhook. All those pieces are supposed to be shipped and deployed as part of standard OpenShift installation.

In case an old kubelet with no admission webhook is used (hypothetical scenario) nothing will happen, the cluster will behave is if no workload partitioning was enabled

## Implementation History

Major milestones in the life cycle of a proposal should be tracked in `Implementation
History`.

## Drawbacks

This feature and its implementation might lead cluster administrators to start using it for manual overrides of the core components like cpu and/or topology manager. That would be an anti-pattern and the presentation of this feature should clearly state that.

## Alternatives

Similar to the `Drawbacks` section the `Alternatives` section is used to
highlight and record other possible approaches to delivering the value proposed

> by an enhancement.

Reviewer: Elsewhere we've discussed the possible need to add per-workload parameters, like scope. The proposal above implies those would end up as separate lists, which I think is fine. We should include the other form here in the Alternatives section, for completeness. Our notes doc has an example as

```yaml
workloadTypes:
    - name: user-defined-workload-type
      scope: Pool
    - name: management
      Scope: ClusterWide
```

Author: Good point!
